Paper

The socialization of meritocracy at school and the justification of social inequality 
JC Castillo, Mauricio Salgado & Kevin Carrasco.

1. Introduction (JC)

Since its origins, educational institutions have been linked to the idea of social mobility and access to better opportunities. Therefore, the consistent evidence of the high level of social reproduction at the school level undoubtedly represents a threat to the promise of education and a meritocratic system [@bourdieu_reproduccion_1998]. A large part of the research in this field at an international level has addressed the extent to which the social origin of students conditions their academic results and their life opportunities [@vonhippel_test_2019], confirming that schools have serious difficulties in closing the gaps of origin. Besides these socioeconomic perspective on school opportunities, recent research has addressed to what extent inequalities at the school context are also affecting students' perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes that could be associated with tolerance and even justification of social inequalities [@batruch_belief_2022;@wiederkehr_belief_2015], both at the school itself and the society at large. The way in which schools deal with unequal conditions of origin is part of the _hidden curriculum_, whereby students learn about distributive norms in society and mechanisms of justification of social differences. Given that the school environment has an important focus on performance, achievement and acknowledgement, meritocracy has been one of the principal concepts used for understanding and even for justifying performance differences among students.  
Meritocracy is a distributive system based on the belief that people should be rewarded and promoted based on their abilities, knowledge, and achievements (Young, 1958). It is often seen as a way to create equal opportunities and fairness, as individuals can rise to positions of power and influence based on their own merit rather than their background or connections. However, some argue that meritocracy can actually lead to a justification of social inequalities, as it can create a hierarchy where those who already have resources and advantages are more likely to succeed and advance (Lampert). A growing area of research in the past decade has analyzed to what extent individuals perceive their society as meritocratic, as well as the degree of support to the meritocratic ideal (Duru-Bellat & Tenret, 2012; Castillo et al., 2019). Most of the research so far in this area has only involved adult population, leaving aside the study of how meritocratic beliefs develop at student age as well as the impact of the school context and the family as main socialization agencies. Based on recent studies that relate school meritocracy to the justification of economic inequalities in adult population [@batruch_belief_2022;@wiederkehr_belief_2015], the central hypothesis guiding this research is that school-age students with a higher perception of meritocracy - both at school and the society - will show a larger justification of social inequalities, as individual achievement would be seen as appropriately rewarded and social mechanisms for correcting inequalities as less necessary (Batruch et al, 2021).
In the following we begin addressing concepts and research related to the justification of social inequalities. For this we draw mostly on the literature of the subjectives dimensions of social inequality (. Next we elaborate around the concept and measurement of meritocracy, as well as on the issues to take into account at the moment of studying school age population. Particularly, we take into account the family and the school as two main socialization agencies that play a significant role in the socialization of cultural beliefs by transmitting cultural norms, values, and expectations to young people. 



Since its origin, educational institutions have been linked to the idea of social mobility and access to better opportunities. Therefore, the consistent evidence of the high level of social reproduction at the school level undoubtedly represents a threat to the promise of education and a meritocratic system [@bourdieu_reproduccion_1998]. A large part of the research in this field at an international level has addressed the extent to which the social origin of students conditions their academic results and their life opportunities [@vonhippel_test_2019], confirming that schools have serious difficulties in closing the gaps of origin. Along with this literature, some recent research has addressed perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes that are associated with tolerance and justification of social inequalities in the school context, and that have been focused on the concept of meritocracy.
Meritocracy is a distributive system based on the belief that people should be rewarded and promoted based on their abilities, knowledge, and achievements (Young, 1958). It is often seen as a way to create equal opportunities and fairness, as individuals can rise to positions of power and influence based on their own merit rather than their background or connections. However, some argue that meritocracy can actually lead to tolerating or even justifying social inequalities, as it can create a hierarchy where those who already have resources and advantages are more likely to succeed. In this regard, a great deal of academic research about meritocracy delves into the assessment of to what extent rewards and privileges in society are related to merit, emphasizing the so-called unfulfillable promise of meritocracy (Mijs, 2016). Complementing this agenda, a second and emerging research area deals with subjective aspects of meritocracy, such as perceptions and beliefs. 
The perception of meritocracy refers to how individuals view and understand the concept of meritocracy in their own society (Duru-Bellat & Tenret, 2012; Castillo et al., 2019). This perception can vary greatly depending on individual experiences, social, economic, and cultural background. Some people may see meritocracy as a fair and just system that allows anyone to succeed based on their abilities and hard work. In contrast, others may view it as a myth or a cover for existing power dynamics and inequality, serving to maintain and even reinforce inequality. From this perspective, the central hypothesis of this research is that individuals with a higher perception of meritocracy will show a larger justification of social inequalities, as individual achievement would be seen as rewarded and social policies as less necessary (Batruch et al, 2021).
The present paper deals with the association between the perception of meritocracy and the justification of social inequalities, with two main focuses. Firstly, it assesses the justification of social inequalities in social policy domains, such as health, pensions, and education. We argue that individuals who perceive more meritocracy would be more willing to justify better services in these domainst for those with higher incomes.  Secondly, we focus on the student-age population as we point out that it is possible to track down the origin of meritocratic beliefs (and their consequences) to early socialization processes. To this regard, we take into account the family and the school as two main socialization agencies that play a significant role in the socialization of cultural beliefs by transmitting cultural norms, values, and expectations to young people. 
2.  Justification of inequality
Research on social stratification beliefs –what individuals believe about who deserves what and why (Kluegel & Smith, 1987)– has demonstrated that people’s explanations of inequality are deeply ingrained in their judgments about what occurs in society. The role of ideologies (Wegener & Liebig, 1995) or cultural schemas (Homan et al., 2017) is to shape these explanations and judgments. Through frames, styles, experiences, and stories, they provide symbolic representations to explain how the world is and ought to be. Specifically, these schemas contain socially, spatially, and temporally situated associations regarding demographic beliefs (e.g., who constitutes the poor), causal attributions (e.g., why they are poor), which, in turn, determine individuals’ redistributive orientations (i.e., what can be done to alleviate poverty). Within this research area ….  [acá definición de justification of inequality]
Given their situated nature, the justification of economic inequality varies significantly between contexts and topics (i.e., justification of unequal access to education or health services), as comparative measures demonstrate. For example, from an international perspective, the 2019 International Social Survey Program (ISSP) study offers insight into the general context in which adults justify inequality. Figure 1 depicts how the extent of agreement varies according to whether it is just (or not) for individuals with higher incomes to have access to better education or health care. In 18 of the 29 countries analyzed, people justify greater inequality in access to health than education, although the general average of both indicators falls between the categories of “somewhat unjust, wrong” and “neither just nor unjust, mixed feelings.” 
Figure 1: Average of justification of inequality by country

Source: ISSP 2019

A substantial body of research has identified beliefs about the causes of poverty and wealth as critical predictors of support for welfare and other redistributive preferences (Baute & Pellegata, 2022; Bullock et al., 2003; Castillo & Rivera-Gutiérrez, 2018; Shirazi & Biel, 2005). Although studies on these beliefs have shown different categories of individuals’ causal attributions of poverty and wealth, most published research has focused on two types of attributions: individualist attributions –where people locate the causes in personal traits and behaviors– and structuralist attributions –where people locate the causes outside the individual in the features of society. Besides these causal attributions of poverty and wealth among people, deeper cognitive processes may also contribute to individuals’ justification of social inequalities across the social hierarchy.
Research findings on justice evaluations of inequality tend to confirm the assertion of system justification theory that most people are motivated to judge as legitimate whatever inequalities are present in the social systems on which their livelihoods depend (Jost et al., 2004; Jost & Burgess, 2000). This “motivated social cognition” explains why members of disadvantaged groups (e.g., lower status, lower class, racial minorities) endorse the belief that unequal social systems are fair and necessary, sometimes even more than those who are advantaged (e.g., higher status, upper class, Whites) (Jost et al., 2017). Individuals from deprived groups are especially likely to confront aversive levels of uncertainty, insecurity, and social exclusion, which leads them to develop a strong desire for long-term stability and security. Furthermore, if a person believes that her system is inevitable and stable, she might have strong reasons to believe that its norms and regulations will continue to govern her life. In this situation, she may become motivated to perceive her inevitable system as fair and good and justify its inequalities to avoid the painful feeling of being “trapped” in an inadequate system (Laurin et al., 2013). Additionally, since merit has become a much-prevailing discursive criterion for assessing goods and rewards in contemporary capitalist societies, people are motivated to justify economic success or failure as reflecting a meritocratic process (Mijs, 2021).
The literature also shows that beliefs about economic, personal, and social deservingness accompany higher social class. Thus, as individuals’ position in the status hierarchy rises, so does their tendency to endorse merit-based explanations of inequality and privilege (Bullock et al., 2003; Kluegel & Smith, 1987; Kraus et al., 2009). For instance, in some contexts, elites distinguish between the poor who can be economically productive and those who lack productivity, helping them determine redistribution by prioritizing the former for public assistance and leaving the latter to private charity (Hossain, 2005). In other contexts, elites understand that rigid social structures are detrimental to the poor, but they also hold a fatalistic view that changing these structures is impossible because they categorize the poor as unorganized, passive, ignorant, and irrational. Therefore, they are skeptical about the success of redistributive policies (Silva & López, 2015). In Chile, elites strongly support meritocracy but explain access to top positions based on talent, defined in terms of business and leadership skills, rather than effort. They profess empathy with the poor but reject redistributive policies because their understanding of talent allows them to reconcile inequality and meritocracy. Chilean economic elites associate achievement expectations with individual responsibility and neglect the role redistribution plays in generating opportunities, placing the private sector at the center of their idea of success (Atria et al., 2020). 
Social stratification in Latin America presents an intriguing case study, as perceptions of stratification are often disconnected from actual stratification. Despite high levels of income inequality and limited social mobility in the region (Salgado & Castillo, 2023; Torche, 2014), there is a pervasive belief among the population that individuals are solely responsible for their economic success or failure (Chong et al., 2008). However, this belief varies significantly across countries in the region (Bucca, 2016), and the trend of decoupling between inequality and personal beliefs about deservingness appears to be growing, potentially extending to most capitalist countries (Mijs, 2021).
3. Meritocracy
The concept of meritocracy frequently appears nowadays when analyzing cultural determinants of social inequalities. In general, it is mentioned as a value associated with justice, as it links efforts and talents with rewards in an equitable manner. This normative sense is quite far from its original formulation by Michael Young (1958) in the satirical novel "The Rise of Meritocracy", where it ironically represented a mechanism for reproducing the inequalities of origin. The meritocratic ideal had remained relatively unchallenged until a series of recent publications have turned into its potential consequences in terms of the maintenance of social inequality. Perhaps one of the most recent sources in this line is Michael Sandel's "The Tyranny of Merit", where he strongly questions the implications of carrying out the principle of merit in societies that do not guarantee equal opportunities and that generate a feeling of scarce recognition and appreciation of those who receive lesser rewards: "In society's eyes, and perhaps also their own, their work no longer signified a valued contribution to the common good." (Sandel, pp).
Along with the philosophical-normative discussion on meritocracy in recent years, empirical research on this topic has also increased, particularly from a sociological perspective. In this discipline, the concept of meritocracy had been used mainly in research on social mobility, where lack of mobility was usually linked to lack of meritocracy as an ideal (Goldthorpe). More recently, however, the focus has been on the subjective aspects vis-a-vis beliefs in meritocracy. These beliefs in general cover a series of areas such as attitudes, perceptions and preferences (Castillo et al), and where they reveal how these subjective dimensions are associated with socio-structural factors at individual and contextual levels. For instance, some studies have analyzed how those with greater privileges believe more in meritocracy (Reynolds & Chan 2014), how greater economic inequality increases meritocratic beliefs (Mijs 2021), and how larger inequality affects meritocratic beliefs (Morris et al 2022). Based on these findings, a research agenda has been reinforced on the legitimizing role meritocracy, in line with research based on the concept of a just world (Lerner, Dalbert) and the theory of system justification (Jost & Major).
The legitimizing character of meritocratic beliefs has been related with redistributive preferences as the sense of fairness and legitimacy of unequal distribution of rewards could lead to justify current inequalities and to elicit aversion towards redistributive policies. Previous research has found that just world beliefs correlates negatively with support for redistributive compensation systems (Frank et al., 2015). Conversely, individuals tend to support redistribution when they believe that the disadvantaged lack the opportunities to succeed (Evans & Kelley, 2018). Almås and colleagues (2020) found that in a relatively unequal society (the United States), the highly educated accept inequality significantly more than the less educated because they perceive inequality as justifiable owing to differences in productivity (i.e., merit), whereas in a relatively equal society (Norway), the less educated accept inequality more, but not significantly more, than the highly educated because meritocratic values are less prevalent. Barr and Miller (2020) also addressed this triple interaction between the level of inequality in a society, the individual level of education, and the perceived origin of the disparity (either by luck or effort) to determine the extent to which inequality is accepted. They found that the mechanism driving the interaction varies depending on which societies are compared. Finally, García-Sánchez and colleagues (2020), using data for 41 countries from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP), found that the perceived size of the income gap correlated positively with support for progressive taxation but this association was weaker among those who endorsed meritocratic and equal opportunity beliefs.
[school, meritocracy and redistributive preferences] Research about meritocratic beliefs at school age is rather scarce, leaving a wide research gap as schools are institutions, as schools are one of the primary socialization institutions where achievement based on merit explains success (Erivwo et al 2021). Nevertheless, it is possible to find some initial works focused on the area of distributive justice at school that are closely related to meritocratic beliefs, as the ones by Resh and Sabbagh (quotes). Using justice in grade obtention as a measure of distributive justice and meritocracy (Sabbagh et al 2006), they find for instance that a larger sense of distributive justice about grades is associated to highersocio-economic status (Resh 2010), have a positive effect on liberal democratic orientation and on trust in people and in formal institutions (Resh & Sabbagh 2013), and tend to refrain from violence and to engage to a greater extent in extra-curricular school activity and community volunteering (Resh & Sabbagh 2017).
4. Children’s judgments of inequality, family background, and schools
Research indicates that various socialization practices at families and schools during childhood and adolescence impact dispositional and behavioral tendencies concerning justifications of inequality in adult life. The differences in economic understanding across age groups are consistent with research on cognitive development (Choudhury et al., 2006). Adolescents with mature socio-cognitive abilities tend to express stronger preferences for fairness than infants and children (Wynn et al., 2017). As children grow older, they become more likely to behave fairly, with their early-emerging strict egalitarianism being replaced by an increasing endorsement of fairness principles and engagement in collaborative activities (Huppert et al., 2019; McAuliffe et al., 2017). In these activities, their fairness views consider individual contributions, merits, and circumstances (Almås et al., 2010; Huppert et al., 2019; Sigelman & Waitzman, 1991). Engelmann and Tomasello (2019) claim that children’s sense of fairness emerges at three years old, and we can observe it in collaborative activities, where they accept inequality if the procedure gives everyone an equal chance. Therefore, children at this age respond to unequal distributions based on interpersonal concerns, as they already demand equal respect.
Additionally, family background and socialization practices contribute to children’s and adolescents’ justice evaluations of inequality. For example, Almås and colleagues (2017) found that adolescents from low-socioeconomic-status families are more likely to have an egalitarian fairness view and consider an equal distribution as fair in a situation with unequal merits. The authors speculate that differences in socialization practices across status groups might bring about, to a great extent, the fairness views of children and adolescents because social status seems to interact with these evaluations (e.g., Hvidberg et al., 2023). 
The classic work of Kohn showed that middle-class parents value the expression of internal states and emotions, such as self-control, curiosity, happiness, and consideration, while working-class parents promote deference, obedience, and conformity to authority (Kohn, 1963; Kohn & Schooler, 1969). Although parents from all social backgrounds encourage individualism in their children, this shared norm translates into different forms in high and low social classes (1999). Children from privileged families are socialized to endorse a clear conception of individualism that highlights their internal states, independence, and idiosyncrasies. In contrast, children from disadvantaged families are socialized to support a more balanced vision of individualism that considers personal characteristics as resources to overcome collective impediments along the upward mobility path (Iacoviello & Lorenzi-Cioldi, 2019). Acemoglu (2021) claimed that the values families impart to their children interact with social mobility. Because obedience is a valuable characteristic for employers, especially when wages are low, in low-wage and social mobility environments, low-income families impart values of obedience to their children to prevent disadvantaging them in labor markets.
Schools also contribute to institutionalizing and reproducing inequality by promoting values, norms, practices, and languages familiar to higher-class families because the dominant group’s culture shapes educational institutions (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1990). Middle- and upper-class students are better equipped to face academic challenges and are more familiar with academic expectations (Mikus et al., 2019). Such familiarity represents cultural capital in educational contexts because higher-status students come to school ready to meet these expectations and reap the benefits (Jack, 2016; Khan, 2011). Conversely, lower-status children lacking cultural capital must catch up while experiencing inequitable comparisons (Goudeau & Croizet, 2017). Additionally, academic achievement is treated as the outcome of dispositional factors (e.g., pupils’ efforts and talents or lack of them) rather than (also) the result of differential access to critical resources. Due to the meritocratic frame schools encourage, both low- and high-status individuals believe that students’ success or failure is not due to their family background but rather to differences in efforts and talents (Darnon et al., 2018).
Recent empirical research has demonstrated that the institutional design of schools, coupled with the meritocratic ideology it fosters, significantly influences children’s and adolescents’ views on inequality and deservingness. For example, Jonsson and Beach’s (2015) study revealed that higher-status adolescents in Sweden tend to perpetuate social class stereotypes while describing the vocational and academic tracks. Academic track students are depicted as wealthy, intelligent, ambitious, and diligent, while vocational track students are characterized as poor, unambitious, unintelligent, and lackadaisical. These stereotypes help individuals maintain a sense of superiority over others and legitimize the prevailing social hierarchies and economic disparities (Jost & Burgess, 2000). 

Summary of hypotheses



H1: Students who perceive that there is more meritocracy in school and society will tend to justify more inequality.
H2: Students from families of higher social status will tend to justify more inequality.
H3: The perception of meritocracy in school and society will moderate the effect of family social status on justification of inequality.
H4: Students from schools of higher social status will tend to justify more inequality.
H5: The perception of meritocracy in school and society will moderate the effect of school status on justification of inequality.
H6: Students from schools with higher average levels of academic achievement will tend to justify more inequality.
H7: The perception of meritocracy in school and society will moderate the effect of school academic achievement on justification of inequality.

4. Methods (Kevin)

4.1 Data

The main data source for the analysis is the First Study of Citizenship Education in Chile, carried out by the Education Quality Agency of the Ministry of Education. The application date was November 9, 2017. The target population of this study is eighth-grade students from 242 schools. In the data there are 8,589 students and 6,770 parents. This database was analyzed with the R package “ResponsePatterns” to detect possible repetitive response patterns and thus contribute to a higher quality of research data (Gottfried, et al 2022). Responses from 171 students and 79 parents were removed.
In addition, for school variables the SIMCE 2017 database of the Ministry of Education was used. This database contains information at the school level, such as the administrative dependency, its socioeconomic classification, and the achievement scores obtained in the census tests of mathematics and language. It is available for free use on the MINEDUC [web page].
The final sample used in the analysis was based on 6,714 students and parents of 241 schools for the dependent variable of access to social services.

4.1 Variables

Dependent variables
There are three dependent variables in this study related to Access to Social Services. The first three address whether access to social services should be conditional to income, i.e “it is just that in Chile people who can pay have a better education for their children”. Students rated their preferences using the following responses: “strongly disagree”, “Disagree”, “Agree”, and “Strongly agree”. The fourth dependent variable is an average index built upon these three indicators (Cronbach's Alpha = 0,86).
Table 1 shows the items used, their response categories and their frequency.
Table 1. Dependent variables


Independent variables

For the main independent variable, the perception of meritocracy, five items were used that address the perception of rewards according to effort and intelligence at the school level and at the societal level. At the school level, students rated the grade according to “Intelligence is important to get good grades” and “Effort is important to get good grades”. At the societal level, students rated the grade according to “In Chile, people are rewarded for their efforts”, “In Chile, people get what they deserve”, and “In Chile, people are rewarded for their intelligence and skill”. Each of these items was measured using a Likert scale from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”.
The rest of the independent variables are divided into individual level and school level. At the individual level, family socioeconomic status was measured from the highest educational level of the parents and the number of books at home. Likewise, an index of access to technology is used that includes the number of computers, tablets and cell phones that are owned in the home, as well as whether it has an Internet connection. Table 2 shows the items used, their response categories and their frequency.
Table 2. Independent variables

At the school level, the category of administrative dependency of the school, the socioeconomic classification made by the Ministry of Education, the level of performance in the SIMCE test of the school and the proportion of parents with university or postgraduate degrees are used. Table 3 shows the items used, their response categories and their frequency.
Table 3. School context variables

4.2 Methods
The methodology proposed to carry out this research is of a quantitative nature. The hypotheses of this research were pre-registered in the Open Science Framework platform of the Center for Open Science (OSF), the access to the document is available at this [link](https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UFSDV). The statistical analysis of this research was performed using the free software R version 4.1.3.
Due to the fact that the sample has a hierarchical structure of students nested in schools, multilevel regressions werewill be estimated to evaluate all the hypotheses. Recognizing that these are students nested in schools alloweds us to include variables measured at different levels of analysis (Aguinis, et. al 2013). Likewise, performing a multilevel regression alloweds us to isolate the individual effects (students) of the aggregates (schools) and, from this, analyze the variance of the results at each level, as well as the proportion of the variance explained by the independent variables of each level. In this sense, it wasis necessary to estimate multilevel regressions that allowed determining if the results in the attitudes of the students depend on their answers at the individual level or by aggregate characteristics at the school level. In addition, when evaluating the hypotheses about the three dependent variables of access to social services a Cumulative link Mixed Models for ordinal variables were estimated. For the average index of access to social services a Linear Mixed-Effects Model was estimated.
Conceptually, there are theoretical reasons to expect to find interaction effects between levels, so moderation analysis models will also be evaluated, in order to determine if the size or direction of the effect of the independent variables on the dependent one are influenced in some way by a third variable (Hayes, 2022).
In this way, following the steps recommended by Aguinis, et. al (2013), 3 general types of hypotheses to be evaluated are established:
 Hypothesis of direct effects at the individual level (1 and 2)
 Hypothesis of direct effects at the aggregate level (4 and 6)
 Hypothesis of moderation (3, 5 and 7)

5. Análisis (JC/Kevin/Mauricio)
Graph X shows how the justification of inequality is distributed according to the variables of perception of meritocracy in society and at school. In general, the average justification of inequality is higher when considering education as the dependent variable, followed by pensions and health. That is, there is a tendency to justify less inequality in health services.
For the three variables of perception of meritocracy in society the relationship is clear, since the average justification of inequality increases the more there is agreement that people are rewarded for their effort, merit, and talent. In the case of the variables of perception of meritocracy at school, this relationship is not so clear: to the extent that there is more agreement that the perception of talent is important for obtaining good grades, the average justification of inequality increases, but this relationships is not as clear as with the variables of meritocracy in society. In addition, the graph does not show a clear trend in the relationship between the perception that effort is important to obtain good grades and the justification of inequality.

Graph X shows the estimation of the regression model 5 for the three inequality justification variables separately and showing only the effect of the variables of meritocracy in society and at school as independent variables. For the three dependent variables the trend is similar. As the variables of social effort, deservingness, social talent, and school talent increase, the justification of inequality increases for the three dependent variables, keeping the rest of the independent variables constant. On the contrary, as the school effort variable increases the justification of inequality decreases for the three dependent variables, keeping the rest of the independent variables constant.

5.4 Access to social services

Table X shows the results of the multilevel estimation for access to social services. For this variable, the intraclass correlation obtained shows that the variation between schools corresponds to 4% of the variation of students’ preferences. This means that there is low variance between schools and therefore limits the possibilities of finding effects at the aggregate level.[ICC estimation] 
Model 1 introduces social meritocratic variables: effort (whether efforts are rewarded), deservingness (people get what they deserve), and social talent (intelligence and skills are rewarded in society). In line with our hypotheses, the perception of a meritocratic society is positively related to the justification of inequality. Model 2 shows a mixed picture: while those perceiving that talent is rewarded also justify the inequality, the perception that effort is rewarded at school is negatively related to justification of inequality. Family background variables in Model 3 reveal that education and technology access are not related to justification of inequality, whereby we observe a negative impact of family cultural capital as measured by the number of books at home. While school socio-structural variables added in Model 4 show no significant effects, average achievement scores in the SIMCE test depict a negative relationship with the dependent variable, meaning that students that attend schools with better achievement scores on average justify less inequality. 
[models fit]
In relation to model fit, when comparing the deviance with a model without predictors (null model), all the models have a statistically significant difference, with model 5 having the lowest deviance. According to Raudenbush and Bryk's (2002) estimate of R2, the level 1 variance of model 5 is 0.11 and the level 2 variance is 0.72. The total variance of model 5 according to Snijders and Bosker (2012) is 0.14.

5.3 interactions

The interaction terms in Table X suggest that students’ family background moderates the relationship between their meritocratic perceptions in Chile and their justification of inequality. The direction of these effects confirms our initial prediction. Thus, in line with our Hypothesis 3, the relationship between effort and justification of inequality becomes less positive for those students whose parents achieved university or postgraduate education. That is, lower-status students (measured by parental education) justify more inequality when they adhere more strongly to deservingnessmeritocratic perceptions in Chile. We depict this moderating effect in Figure 1. This result confirms the enlightenment thesis (see above). The same moderating effect is observed for students’ f	amily cultural capital: the relationship between effort (but not deservingness nor social talent) and justification of inequality becomes less positive for students with more than 25 books at home. Interestingly, family cultural capital also moderates the relationship between meritocratic beliefs at school (as measured by students’ belief that effort is important to get good grades) and justification of inequality.
At the school level, we also observe moderating effects of school status and students’ meritocratic beliefs over their justification of inequality. Thus, in line with our Hypothesis 5, high-status schools justify less inequality when, on average, their students have a greater perception of meritocracy in Chile, as measured by the three indicators we used (i.e., effort, deservingness, and talent). Finally, as we stated in Hypothesis 7, lowhigh-achieving schools justify more inequality when their students have, on average, stronger meritocratic beliefs in Chile. In Figure 2 we depict this moderating effect of school achievement for the relationship between deservingness and justification of inequality. We did not observe these moderating effects at the school level for students’ meritocratic beliefs in the school (i.e., the idea that effort or talent are important to get good grades).

(Mauricio - primer draft, corrige JC)

school simce x deservingness



Ideas conclusiones
Efecto ilustrador de la educación? (esfuerzo -> redistribución)
























Appendix
5.1 Access to better health services


5.2 Access to better education


5.3 Access to better pensions



